README.md, before:

# Sleep Stage Detection Project

## Project Overview:
This project aims to detect sleep stages from polysomnographic data (EEG, EOG, ECG) of healthy patients. The goal is to develop a model that is useful for clinicians by automating the classification of sleep stages, thus reducing the need for manual annotation. The project leverages machine learning techniques, primarily using XGBoost.

## Data Source:
The data used in this project comes from the SleepTight dataset, specifically from Subgroup 3 (healthy patients). You can access the dataset [here](https://sleeptight.isr.uc.pt/?page_id=48).

## Requirements:
- **XGBoost** for model implementation.
- **Metrics:** AUC, F1 score (for each class) for both development (training and validation) and test sets (2 complete patients in all stages).
- **Variable Importance:** At least one method to assess variable importance.

## Deliverables:
1. **Slide Presentation** summarizing the results and methodology.
2. **Code** to justify the results obtained.
3. **Time Logs** detailing hours dedicated to each phase of the project.

## Evaluation Criteria:
- **Content:** 70% of the evaluation.
- **Presentation & Defense:** 30% of the evaluation.
- The evaluation mimics a bachelor’s thesis defense, with a focus on the process and usefulness for clinicians.

## Project Steps:
1. **Data Preprocessing:**  
   Segment the EEG, EOG, and ECG channels into 30-second windows and extract relevant clinical features (e.g., alpha/beta energy bands, spindles, artifacts, K-complexes).
   
2. **Model Implementation:**  
   - **Model Type:** XGBoost (multiclass or one model per class).
   - Apply appropriate techniques for **training, validation, and testing**.
   - **Adjustable Thresholds:** Explore ways to penalize simpler classes and favor complex ones.
   
3. **Interpretability:**  
   Ensure the model’s interpretability, with a focus on clinical relevance. Use interpretability libraries like **SHAP** or **LIME** for tree-based models.

## Key Questions:
- What training/validation/test strategy will you use?
- Does the model prioritize clinically relevant features?
- Have you considered the annotations from the doctors and how you handle discrepancies?

## Notes:
- The problem does not have a single solution, as even clinicians often disagree on the classification of sleep stages (see Kappa index on the dataset's results page).

![Rubrica](images/Rubrica.png)

Commit message:

add eda, mlflow & some data and plot utilities

README.md, after:

# Sleep Stage Detection Project

## Project Overview:
This project aims to detect sleep stages from polysomnographic data (EEG, EOG, ECG) of healthy patients. The goal is to develop a model that is useful for clinicians by automating the classification of sleep stages, thus reducing the need for manual annotation. The project leverages machine learning techniques, primarily using XGBoost.

## Data Source:
The data used in this project comes from the SleepTight dataset, specifically from Subgroup 3 (healthy patients). You can access the dataset [here](https://sleeptight.isr.uc.pt/?page_id=48).

## MLflow Integration

We are using MLflow for experiment tracking, model versioning, and reproducibility. MLflow helps us manage the machine learning lifecycle, including experimentation, reproducibility, and deployment. Here's how to use it:

1. Start the MLflow server:

```bash
mlflow server --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8080
```

View experiments and results in the MLflow UI by navigating to http://127.0.0.1:8080 in your web browser.

## Requirements:
- **XGBoost** for model implementation.
- **Metrics:** AUC, F1 score (for each class) for both development (training and validation) and test sets (2 complete patients in all stages).
- **Variable Importance:** At least one method to assess variable importance.

## Deliverables:
1. **Slide Presentation** summarizing the results and methodology.
2. **Code** to justify the results obtained.
3. **Time Logs** detailing hours dedicated to each phase of the project.

## Evaluation Criteria:
- **Content:** 70% of the evaluation.
- **Presentation & Defense:** 30% of the evaluation.
- The evaluation mimics a bachelor’s thesis defense, with a focus on the process and usefulness for clinicians.

## Project Steps:
1. **Data Preprocessing:**  
   Segment the EEG, EOG, and ECG channels into 30-second windows and extract relevant clinical features (e.g., alpha/beta energy bands, spindles, artifacts, K-complexes).
   
2. **Model Implementation:**  
   - **Model Type:** XGBoost (multiclass or one model per class).
   - Apply appropriate techniques for **training, validation, and testing**.
   - **Adjustable Thresholds:** Explore ways to penalize simpler classes and favor complex ones.
   
3. **Interpretability:**  
   Ensure the model’s interpretability, with a focus on clinical relevance. Use interpretability libraries like **SHAP** or **LIME** for tree-based models.

## Key Questions:
- What training/validation/test strategy will you use?
- Does the model prioritize clinically relevant features?
- Have you considered the annotations from the doctors and how you handle discrepancies?

## Notes:
- The problem does not have a single solution, as even clinicians often disagree on the classification of sleep stages (see Kappa index on the dataset's results page).

![Rubrica](images/Rubrica.png)
